I am working on a project to train instance segmentation models for different topology (cell type) in cereal plant root cross-section fluorescence microscopy images across different species and genotypes. Each sample has images in three color channels. I have annotated polygons in 4 classes of labels in YOLO style in the training data. The epidermis is the outermost layer of the root, forming the interface between the root tissue and the surrounding background. It appears as a layer of connected cells surrounding the entire cross-section. We will use the epidermis boundary to define the outer limit of the "whole root" annotation. The endodermis is a thin layer of cells that separates the cortex from the vascular cylinder of the root. It acts as a natural dividing line between two key zones and is defined by a higher signal in 2 of 3 channels in our multichannel images. These cells are usually smaller and more rectangular than the surrounding cortex cells. We annotated outer endodermis and inner endodermis, as two concentric rings. But actually, the polygon of inner endodermis covers the area called vascular, the area between inner endodermis and outer endodermis is called endodermis. You can do subtraction to get the correct polygon for correct labels. Aerenchyma are air-filled spaces that form within the root’s cortex, which is between the outer endodermis and inner exodermis (we do not annotate exodermis. It's mentioned here just for the context). They appear as irregular, bubble-like holes between neighboring cells and often vary in size and shape. Aerenchyma can not appear in the endodermis, exodermis, or epidermis. 

Annotated:
0: Whole Root
1: Aerenchyma
2: Outer Endodermis
3: Inner Endodermis

Actually wanted:
0: Whole Root
1: Aerenchyma
2: Endodermis
3: Vascular

Some general segmentation rules: 1)Always follow visible cell walls when outlining boundaries. 2) Polygon can overlap, but ensure that NO annotated polygon boundaries intersect each other. For example, all the aerenchyma polygon will be inside the whole root polygon, but their boundaries should be crossing each other.

Some of the goals and a potential publishable paper are: 1) we want to have good instance segmentation performance for all classes across different cereal species, including millet, rice, and sorghum. 2) across different genotypes. 3) across images collected from different microscopes, including C10, Olympus, and Zeiss. 4) potentially the trained model will  learn some feature of fluorescence microscopy of roots, and we will have a fluorescence microscopy image encoder for plant roots with some generalizability to other plants, for example, tomato plants, which have a more different root structure,  with/without minimal adaptation.

Image folder structure: 
species -> microscope -> experiment -> samples in that experiment. 

Annotations folder:
Annotations for all images are in one folder, the annotation file name is "species"_"microscope"_"experiment"_"sample name"  of the corresponding sample.

Dataset size: 1311 samples.

GPU: One 4090.

When you split train and test, be aware that samples from the same experiment might have similar ones. So samples from the same experiment should not both be in the training and the test. Make sure to balance between different species and microscope as much as possible. 

Please turn this into a project guideline claude.md, to help me use Claude code to train a set of segmentation models using different strategies. Make sure use the SOTA architectures and models. Some models you could train and compare: 1) fine-tune a pretrained model from generic image dataset, 2) fine-tune models like cellpose, which are pretrained on fluorescence microscopy image data. 3) Train a model from scratch. 4) explore different architectures, like autoencoder. You can also suggest models for the dataset size and goals.

Some train strategies for generalizability you can compare the metrics of instance segmentation: 1) train a model on all species across all microscopes and test on all species across all microscopes. This will be the most straightforward one. 2) Train a model on sorghum and rice from different C10 and Olympus, and leave the millet from Olympus (new species from the same microscope) and rice from Zeiss (trained species but from a new microscope) as tests for generalizability. 3) If there is a hard time making the model generalize using the first two strategies,  train separate models for different species, and test the model in an ensemble way.

Please build proper dataset and dataloader, so I can easily include or exclude a specific species or data from a specific microscope when assemble training data. Make sure to use proper preprocessing and augmentation for fluorescence microscopy images during training, including but not limited to normalization and drop out channels, or swapping channels. Implement early-stopping and other good practices.

Make sure save the best model and checkpoints during training but don't save the checkpoint too much to crowd the memory. Report and save the pixel-level metrics, like accuracy, dice, Iou, etc. for overall, and for each specie, and microscope.   

Some downstream tasks after segmentation are: 1) calculate the total aerenchyma polygon area/ whole root polygon area for each sample. 2) Calculate the average intensity in each channel in the endodermis cell area, which is the ring area between the outer and inner endodermis boundaries.3) Calculate the average intensity in each channel in vascular area. 4)count the number of aerenchyma polygon per sample.


